docs: Added move language pack into platform ADR (#10215)
shopware/platform: adr/2025-06-03-integrating-the-language-pack-into-platform.md

---
title: Integrating the language pack into platform
date: 2025-06-03
area: discovery
tags: [plugin, languages, language-pack, translations, crowdin]
---

## Context

> The Shopware Language Pack plugin enables us to distribute translations from Crowdin to Shopware installations. While this was a convenient solution in the past, while most of our repositories and workflows were kept private, this approach is unnecessarily convoluted and cumbersome for developers and users in that changes to any snippet require multiple steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Shopware Language Pack plugin enables us to distribute translations from crowdin to Shopware installations. While this was a convenient solution in the past, when most of our repositories and workflows were kept private. This approach is unnecessarily convoluted and cumbersome for developers and users, because changes to any snippet require multiple steps:
```

> 1. Translations are updated in CrowdIn (by the community or shopware)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Translations are updated in crowdin (by the community or Shopware)
```
crowdin is always full lowercase, Shopware (the software) always in capital case

Reviewer 2: This is referring to shopware, as in _shopware employees_ are maintaining our crowdin project

Reviewer: Good point. Would specify that to avoid such confusion again 👍

Author: Are you sure with Crowdin? they also write it like this on their own site
![Bildschirmfoto 2025-06-04 um 10 31 29](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fde735fe-875c-4e8e-a11f-5e845c85b87f)

Reviewer: Lol, then they changed that. I remember when working on that tooling initially, they told me that I have to write it in lowercase. Thanks for checking! Capital case will do it then, I guess

Author: "by the shopware team and community"  🌞

> 2. Merging the changes from CrowdIn into `shopware/translations` (automated, may require manual review)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Merging the changes from Crowdin into `shopware/translations` (automated, requires manual review)
```
Always requires manual review

> 3. Merging the changes from `shopware/translations` into `shopware/SwagLanguagePack`, which primarily just distributes json files (automated, may require manual review)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Merging the changes from `shopware/translations` into `shopware/SwagLanguagePack`, which primarily just distributes json files (automated)
```
This is always fully automated

> 4. Publishing Language Pack releases the store (automated, may require manual input)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Publishing Language Pack releases to the store (automated, may require manual input)
```

5. Updating Language Pack installation
   - OnPrem: Manually updating the plugin in a Shopware installation
   - Cloud: Updating the docker image dependency

> This sequence also introduces overhead in maintenance and CI/CD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sequence also introduces overhead in maintenance and CI/CD.
```

### Background and Motivation
* The current setup was influenced by limitations of our previous GitLab-based workflow, where distribution via plugin was the most practical method. This workflow has been in place for ~6 years.

> * Crowdin remains our source of truth for all supported language snippets, and community members can contribute translations directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Crowdin remains our single source of truth for all supported language snippets and community members can contribute translations directly.
```

> * `shopware/translations` acts as an intermediary data source, so we are not coupled to Crowdin in core Shopware repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `shopware/translations` serves as an intermediary data layer to decouple core Shopware repositories from crowdin.
```
Improves the readability a bit. Optional, but recommended

> * The primary goal of this change is to reduce maintenance effort by replacing steps 3–5 with a single step, and removing `shopware/SwagLanguagePack` from the workflow entirely. The new step should be in `shopware/shopware`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The primary goal of this change is to reduce maintenance effort by replacing steps 3–5 with a single step, and removing `shopware/SwagLanguagePack` from the workflow entirely. The new step should be targeting `shopware/shopware` instead.
```

## Decision

> We will implement a new service in `shopware/shopware` (ie as part of the Shopware platform) to download translations right from their [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/shopware/translations/) and manage them without the need to install any extension.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will implement a new service in `shopware/shopware` (?ie? as part of the Shopware platform) to download translations right from their [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/shopware/translations/) and manage them without the need to install any extension.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will implement a new service in `shopware/shopware` (i.e. as part of the Shopware platform) to download translations right from the [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/shopware/translations/) and manage them without the need of any extension.
```

> Translations will be downloaded as JSON files (via admin user interaction or command execution) and stored on the local file system, just like existing platform snippet files.

Reviewer 3: only local? what about other used file systems?

Author: Yes, we intend to store them on the local file system within the Shopware directory – just like it worked before for existing platform snippet files 🙂 The core will read them from a fixed folder location like e.g. plugins.

Reviewer: Because of cloud? In cloud, the snippets will be downloaded once for all instances.

Reviewer 3: will you introduce a new Flysystem instance for that? like we do with private plugin data, assets, theme stuff, etc?

Author: Currently we are planning to use the existing default storage for now with Symfonys filesystem implementation. Extensions are using the Symfonys filesystem implementation too (symfony/finder component), so we would potentially mix things up if we want to keep searching for their snippet files and store snippet files on a remote system. But of course, we can extract it into a separate Flysystem instance if this need will come up :)

> In addition, we will provide new bin/console commands in `shopware/shopware` to manage installed languages, for example when building an image for deployment. The initial set of commands will look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, we will provide new `bin/console` commands in `shopware/shopware` to manage installed languages, for example when building an image for deployment. The initial set of commands will look like this:
```

```bash

> $ php bin/console language

Reviewer: Is this already set in stone? I'd prefer to use `translations`, since language entities do imply something different.

Author: I agree 👍

Available commands:
    install [languages] [--all]
    activate [languages] [--all]
    deactivate [languages] [--all]
    uninstall [languages] [--all]
    list
```

## Consequences
* The Language Pack plugin will be maintained for Shopware versions < v6.8.0.
* Translations can be installed and updated on-demand, instead of waiting for platform/plugin release cycles.
* Translation versions will be mapped to platform version ranges.
* The general translations workflow remains the same. This has no impact on other extensions and their snippet files.

> * For admin users the UX will improve: Available languages will now be listed directly in the Languages module and can be installed with a single click.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For admin users the UX will improve: Available translations will now be listed directly in the Languages module and can be installed with a single click.
```

Author: I’m keeping it generic for now: `Available translations will now be listed directly in the administration and can be installed with a single click.`
We can clarify the exact behavior during refinement – no need to decide that at this point.

> * In the future this will allow us to improve the first run wizard UX, for example by preconfiguring countries and currencies based on a selected language.

Reviewer: I thought that would be an independent change 🤔 Why mention it here?

Reviewer: If that's already in: Maybe we also can mention that we will improve loading user translations with that as well. I know that's something a lot of people are waiting for

Reviewer 3: do not confuse an ADR with an epic :wink:

Author: I will delete this point 👍
